\documentclass{beamer}

\usetheme{Warsaw}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{ulem}
\input{include.tex}
\input{Definitions.tex}

\usefonttheme{serif}

\title{Troll you a Erik for great good OR How I learned to stop worrying and love floating point numbers}
\author{Mark Greenaway\\PhD candidate\\markg@maths.usyd.edu.au}

\mode<presentation>
{ \usetheme{boxes} }

\begin{document}
\begin{frame}
\maketitle
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}

I want to cover how numbers are constructed, starting from the natural numbers up to the integers, the
rationals and then the real and complex numbers.

Because mathematics is \emph{not} a spectator sport, I will be doing this with proofs, live, on the
whiteboard.

I'm willing to spend a little bit of time on foundational issues, but not a lot. I'm a mathematical
analysis/mathematical statistician. There are certain things we accept without question. For instance, most
mathematicians accept that

\begin{equation*}
\mathbb{N} \subset \mathbb{Z} \subset \mathbb{R} \subset \mathbb{C}
\end{equation*}

but Liam, Tran's boyfriend, doesn't. He claims that the statement doesn't type check, and hence is
meaningless. I suspect he's trolling/showing off his superior type theory knowledge, but have been unable to
pin him down on the issue. Virtually no practicing mathematician would accept this argument. But I'm not a
type theorist or a Haskell programmer, so my perspective is different. I don't give a flying fuck whether
things type check, or are even computable. And neither do most pure mathematicians. We work with non-
computable things all the time. It doesn't trouble us.

Like the reals. I'm going to present one proof that the reals are uncountable, my favorite one which I learned
in my third year measure theory course. It's relatively elementary. I'm introducing it because it shows that
you can't possibly compute with the reals on a computer with finite memory in finite time.

I'm also going to include a proof that you need the irrational numbers to complete the reals, using the
square root of 2, although $\pi$ would work just as well.

The reals not being computable mean that we must adopt some finite approximation of the reals, and compute
with that. The dominant choice that most people will work with is the floating point numbers. They're
ubiquitous, and implemented in hardware (CPUs and GPUs). There's a strong body of research work from the
numerical analysis community on how to compute with them well i.e. to minimise the error. That doesn't make
them ideal for all purposes. There are many alternative choices which one could make e.g. fixed point, unums,
arbitrary precision, http://math.andrej.com/2007/09/18/the-role-of-the-interval-domain-in-modern-exact-real-
airthmetic/, that exact real number computing PhD thesis that Edward Kmett implemented in Haskell etc. I want
to briefly touch on some of these things, with reference to Amdahl's Law ``the fast drove out the slow, even
though the fast was slightly wrong'', the Wrath of Kahan (the inventor of floating point is good at showing
that competing schemes suffer from the same or even worse problems, and generally publishes the results) and
simple practicality (upon hearing of unums, one of Intel's VPs simply said ``You can't boil the ocean.'' by
which he meant that expecting people to change every CPU and piece of software in existence to suit your new
idea is just too large a task, and unrealistic).

I'm going to talk primarily about floating point, because that's the representation I work with and the one I
know the most about. It's also the one that most people will encounter and try first. Usually, people swear
and give up and use something else only when they've tried the floating point numbers and had them not work.

I want to give a flavour for what numerical analysis is about, why we need it and what we can learn from it.
I'm particularly looking forward to showing that the floating point numbers do not form a monoid under
addition, or any other binary operation. I'll then talk about what to do about that i.e. which ordering is
the optimal ordering to minimise the error in your calculations. There will always be \emph{some} error, but
we do our best.

I'll also throw in a couple of jokes that I hope people will like. And I'll talk about myself just a little,
and how I came to be interested in these things.

\end{frame}

\end{document}
